After studying depth-first search
algorithm, we need some practice,
we will attempt to solve the "Find if path exists
in graph" problem. We are given an integer n that
represents the number of vertices, labeled from 0
to n-1, and an array of undirected edges. We are
also given two vertices start and end, and we want
to check if there exists a path from start to end.
Math notation in the bottom-right corner is
here to give you information about the input,
it says that the length of an element of edges
is 2, logic, an edge is made of 2 elements,
it also says that start and end are between 0 and
n-1, we deduce that they will be in our graph.
And last thing, for each edge (u,v), u and v are
between 0 and n-1, and u is different from v.
We deduce that we will have edges between existing
vertices and that we will have no self-loops.
Here is a first example, we
have 9 vertices, some edges,
and we want to know if there is a path from 0 to
6. The result is false, 6 is not reachable from 0.
If we keep the same input but change start from 0
to 3, here we get true, there is a path between 3
and 6. How to solve this problem? Step one, we
need to build the graph, either as an adjacency
list or as an adjacency matrix. Let's choose
the adjacency list. Vertices here are labeled
from 0 to n-1, which also represent indices of
an array. So to implement the adjacency list,
instead of a hash table, we can just use
an array, where the key is the index. This
is why we build an array of n empty arrays, the
array i represents the neighbors of the vertex i.
Now we traverse edges to fill the adjacency list.
Edges are undirected here, so for each pair (u,
v), we put an edge from u to v, but also from
v to u. This is why we add v to neighbors of u,
and we add u to neighbors of v. Okay we
built the graph, we can start working.
You need to know that when applying dfs starting
from a vertex u, all vertices it traverses are
considered reachable by u. Reachable by u means
that there is a path from u to that vertex,
which is the case, the path is the
actual branch from u to that vertex.
For example here from A we went to C,
from C we went to D, from D we went to H,
it means that H for example is reachable
by A, the path is this one, A C D H.
And in our problem, we want to know
if there is a path from start to end,
in other words, if end is reachable from
start. We deduce that what we can do is
to apply dfs starting from start, and if we
reach end, it means that there is a path.
We have our dfs function, we call it on start,
but, how can we know that we traversed end or not.
We can know it by checking the visited set,
remember that initially the set is empty,
and every time we visit a vertex, we add it
there. So technically, if we visited end,
it should be in the visited set. This is
why, we return this boolean expression,
end in visited, it will return true
if end is in visited, false if not,
because it's what will determine if
there's a path from start to end or not.
We can even optimize this solution a little
bit, by stopping as soon as we find end,
to avoid traversing the whole remaining part of
the graph uselessly. To do so, we transform our
dfs function to a boolean function that says if
yes or no we found end, so that as soon as one of
the calls on neighbors returns true, we stop and
return true, without continuing other neighbors.
To implement it, we first need to add a parameter
end, that represents the vertex we're searching
for. Second thing, we add a base case, if the
actual vertex is the one we're searching for,
we directly return true. Now
after passing the condition,
we don't just call the function without doing
nothing else with its result, here we check its
result. We want to return true if one of the
neighbors return true, this is why we write,
if the dfs call on the neighbor returns true,
we directly return true. And if after traversing
all neighbors we couldn't find what we're
searching for, we return false, it means that
neither this vertex is end, nor we can find it by
continuing from its neighbors, we return false.
What does it mean concretely? Let's suppose
that we're on start, it's not equal to end,
we don't enter the base case. We start traversing
neighbors, we go to the first one. Not equal to
end, we start traversing neighbors. This one,
not equal to end, and it doesn't have unvisited
neighbors, so we can't find end from here, we
return false. We move to the second neighbor,
same thing, it returns false. All neighbors
returned false, so we return false.
We move to the next neighbor. Not equal to end, we
check neighbors. Neighbor one, it's equal to end,
so it directly returns true. And from here,
we don't need to check remaining neighbors,
we also directly return true. Same
thing here, we directly return true.
It was the first call, it returned true, so there
is a path from start to end, and we didn't need to
perform all the depth-first traversal, we stopped
as soon as we found what we were searching for.
Back to code, in the main solution function,
instead of calling dfs to fill the set then
checking if end is inside it, we just
return the boolean function we made now,
remember that it returns if yes or no we
can find end starting from the vertex,
this is why we call it with start, we want to
check if we can find end by starting from start.
And we solved the problem with depth-first search.
By the way, you can notice that we
didn't even use the Graph class,
we just created an array that represents the
adjacency list, no need for something else.
What about the time complexity? We first have the
cost of building the graph, which costs n+m. n is
the input given, which represents the number
of vertices, and m is the length of the array
of edges, basically it represents the number of
edges. n+m because we're creating an array of n
elements, which costs n, then we're traversing
the m edges to fill the adjacency list, n+m.
Then we have the dfs call. Previously we said that
the time complexity of dfs is O(|V|+|E|) with an
adjacency list, but here we're calling dfs once,
we don't have that loop in the main function that
traverses all vertices. But we still have |E| as a
cost, the cost of traversing, because in the worst
case, one dfs call will traverse all the edges.
And |E| here is m, so in total we have n+m for
building the graph and m for the traversal, we
get a time complexity of O(n+m). Which is also
O(|V|+|E|) in reality, because here n represents
the number of vertices and m the number of edges.
And for the space complexity, remember
that the space used by an adjacency list
is |V|+2|E| for an undirected graph,
we said it in the previous chapter,
and we have |V| for the visited set, and |V|
for the call stack. In total we get 3|V|+2|E|,
which gives O(|V|+|E|), which is O(n+m),
we have an O(n+m) space complexity.
We reached the end of this lecture, as always, if
you didn't understand something, don't hesitate
to reach out by asking questions, it's better
to ask questions and better understand rather
than not be happy with the course,
seriously. See you in the next lecture!